CC-39653: Document Architecture Sniffer core and project rulesets (#3816)
spryker/spryker-docs: docs/dg/dev/sdks/sdk/development-tools/architecture-sniffer.md

    link: docs/dg/dev/sdks/sdk/development-tools/tooling-configuration-file.html
---

We use our [Architecture Sniffer Tool](https://github.com/spryker/architecture-sniffer) to ensure the quality of Spryker architecture for both core and project. The tool builds on [PHP Mess Detector](https://phpmd.org) and ships two independent rulesets:

| Ruleset | Use it for | Path |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Core | Spryker core, ecosystem, and module development | `vendor/spryker/architecture-sniffer/src/ruleset.xml` |

> | Project | Application (project) development | `vendor/spryker/architecture-sniffer/src/Project/ruleset.xml` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Project | Project development and customisations | `vendor/spryker/architecture-sniffer/src/Project/ruleset.xml` |
```

In both rulesets, lower priorities include the higher ones: a run with `--minimumpriority=3` also reports violations of priority `1` and `2`.

## Install Architecture Sniffer

Include the sniffer as a `require-dev` dependency:

```bash
composer require --dev spryker/architecture-sniffer:"^0.6.0"
```

> The project ruleset requires version `0.6.0` or later.

Reviewer: Let's cover the case, when customer doesn't know about the dev packages mode.

```suggestion
The project ruleset requires version `0.6.0` or later.
Make sure that the environment, where sniffer is executed, is installing development composer packages.
```

## Running the tool

> Run the ruleset that matches what you are working on: the core ruleset for core, ecosystem, and module development, or the project ruleset for application development.

Reviewer: Why?
This documentation is for projects, they will never use core ruleset.

Also, Eco modules are not strictly following Core rulest.

Author: let's remove the core part

Author: removed core arch sniffer

### Core development

Use the core ruleset for Spryker core, ecosystem, and module development.

#### Core priority levels

- `1`: API and critical
- `2`: Non-critical (nice to have)
- `3`: Experimental—the inspected code needs further fixing

We recommend a minimum priority of `2` for local and CI checks.

#### Run the core ruleset

The sniffer can find a lot of violations and reports them:

```bash

> vendor/bin/console code:sniff:architecture

Reviewer: Useless
```suggestion
```

Author: removed core arch sniffer

# Sniff a specific subfolder of your project with verbose output
vendor/bin/console code:sniff:architecture src/Pyz/Zed -v

# Sniff a specific module
vendor/bin/console code:sniff:architecture -m Customer
```

{% info_block infoBox "Tip" %}

You can use `c:s:a` as a shortcut.

> {% endinfo_block %}

Reviewer: I would drop this, you never know what commands are added on the project.

Author: removed core arch sniffer

Additional options:

- `-p`: Priority [1 (highest), 2 (medium), 3 (experimental)]. Defaults to `2`.

> - `-s`: Strict—also reports nodes with a `@SuppressWarnings` annotation.

Reviewer: Please make sure `<space>-<space>` is used and not just `-` without spaces between words - it's unnatural. everywhere.

- `-d`: Dry run—only outputs the command to be run.

To get help about all available options, run `--help` or `-h`.

You can also run the core ruleset directly:

```bash
vendor/bin/phpmd src/Pyz/ text vendor/spryker/architecture-sniffer/src/ruleset.xml --minimumpriority=2
```

#### Include the core ruleset in PhpStorm

1. In PhpStorm, go to **Editor&nbsp;→&nbsp;Inspections&nbsp;→&nbsp;PHP&nbsp;→&nbsp;PHP Mess Detector validation** and add a custom ruleset named `Architecture Sniffer` that points to `vendor/spryker/architecture-sniffer/src/ruleset.xml`.
2. Go to **Framework & Languages&nbsp;→&nbsp;PHP&nbsp;→&nbsp;Mess Detector** and set the path to your phpmd binary: `vendor/bin/phpmd`.

> 3. Select **Validate** to confirm that the setup works.

Reviewer: Useless
```suggestion
```

### Project development

Use the project ruleset for application development. It bundles adapted PHPMD rules, Spryker architecture rules, and project-only rules.

#### Project priority levels

- `1`: Critical
- `2`: Major
- `3`: Medium
- `4`: Minor

We recommend the following minimum priority based on project maturity:

> - `1` and `2`: for all projects, including those with legacy code

Reviewer: I think `1` makes no sense for projects.

```suggestion
- `2`: for all projects, including those with legacy code
```

> - `3`: for all new projects

Reviewer: What does it mean?
Do we have it enabled to level 3 in the demoshop and no issues are reported?

> - `4`: for a modern AI-assisted development flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `4`: for the current AI-assisted development flow
```

#### Set up the project ruleset

> The project ruleset is meant to be tuned per project, so do not run the vendor file directly. Instead, create a thin `phpmd.xml` file in your project root—the conventional default file name of PHPMD. This file references the vendor project ruleset, and you layer your customizations on top of it:

Reviewer: I don't agree, since we should avoid asking projects to make changes, that are mandatory for most of projects.

> **phpmd.xml**

Reviewer: Why did you rename the file?
```suggestion
**config/ruleset.xml**
```

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<ruleset name="Spryker Project"
         xmlns="http://pmd.sf.net/ruleset/1.0.0"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
    <description>Project architecture ruleset.</description>

    <!-- File and path exclusions: filter which files are analyzed -->
    <exclude-pattern>*/Generated/*</exclude-pattern>

>     <exclude-pattern>*/Orm/*</exclude-pattern>

Reviewer: I would expect this to be a part of the ruleset in the Core package.

Author: import of exclufdings does not work

    <!-- Import the vendor project ruleset -->
    <rule ref="vendor/spryker/architecture-sniffer/src/Project/ruleset.xml" />
</ruleset>
```

> Commit `phpmd.xml` to version control so that all developers and the CI pipeline use the same configuration.

Reviewer: let's mention suggested path (/config/ruleset.xml) and the command line to run the tool.
